Reprinted here from ColumbiaNet with permission from Columbia
University Academic Information Systems.

MODEM PROTOCOL OVERVIEW
December 4, 1993

MODULATION

Modems communicate with each other using a MODULATION method, which
translates between digital computer data and analog telephone signals.
Two modems must support the SAME modulation method or they can't
communicate at all.

The common modulation methods are:

MODULATION/STANDARD   CONNECTION SPEEDS (BPS)
  Bell 103              110, 150, 300.
  CCITT V.21            110, 150, 300.
  Bell 212A             1200.
  CCITT V.22            1200, 600.
  CCITT V.22 bis        2400.
  CCITT V.32            9600, 4800, 2400.
  CCITT V.32 bis        14400, 12000, 9600, 7200.
  Telebit PEP           High speeds, proprietary to Telebit.
  US Robotics HST       High speeds, proprietary to US Robotics.
  "V.Terbo"             20000 bps, not a standard, never will be.
  "V.Fast"              Preliminary implementations of V.34.
  "V.FC"                "V.Fast-Class".
  ITU-T V.34 **         28800, 26400, 24000, 21600, 19200, 16800, 14400

** V.34 is not yet finalized.

GLOSSARY

  BPS   = Bits Per Second.  10 bps = 1 cps (character per second);
          One character = 8 data bits plus 1 start bit and 1 stop bit.
  CCITT = International Telegraph and Telephone Consultative Committee
          (Note: CCITT changed its name to ITU-T on March 1, 1993).
  ITU-T = International Telecommunications Union, Telecommunication
          Standardization Sector.
  V.xxx = ITU-T (CCITT) series of "recommendations" (standards) relating
          to telecommunications.
  bis   = "the second".
  ter   = "the third".
  PEP   = Packet Ensemble Protocol (Telebit proprietary).
  HST   = High Speed Technology (US Robotics proprietary).

We continue to use "CCITT" in the remainder of this document because
it is still common usage, particularly in modem manuals and data
communications texts.

MODULATION FALLBACK

When you make a modem call, the calling (originating) modem sends out
a tone using the type of modulation that you have selected.  Usually the
selection is made automatically by the modem, based on the interface
speed between your PC and the modem, which is sensed automatically by
most Hayes-compatible modems when they are given an AT command.  In many
cases, there are also modem-specific commands to choose a particular
modulation.

If the answering modem supports the type of modulation you have selected,
the connection is made immediately.  Otherwise the modems attempt to "fall
back" to a lower type of modulation, the highest one they have in common.
For example, if a 2400-bps V.22bis modem calls a 14400-bps V.32bis modem,
the two modems will communicate at 2400 bps, the highest speed they have
have in common.  Fallback is generally reliable among the CCITT standard
modulations:

  V.32bis -> V.32 -> V.22bis -> V.22

In the USA, most modems fall back from V.22 to Bell 103, but different
(incompatible) low-speed modulation methods are used in other countries,
such as CCITT V.21 or V.23.  Most modern high-speed modems have a command
to choose the low-speed fallback standard; in the USA, you should set your
modem to fall back to the Bell 103 standard.

Within a particular modulation (V.32 and up) it is also possible to
fall back to lower speeds when a higher-speed connection can't be made,
for example because of excessive noise on the telephone connection.
For example, a V.32bis connection can be made at 14400 bps, 12000 bps,
9600 bps, or 7200 bps.

Mixing proprietary modulations like PEP or HST into the fallback scheme
generally requires special configuration settings on your modem.

It is also possible for the two modems to change speeds in the middle
of a connection, perhaps because they have detected an increase in
telephone-line noise; this is called "retraining" -- the connection
goes "on hold" for a couple seconds, but is not broken.  Retraining
occurs only if both modems have this capability and have agreed with
each other to use it.

INTERFACE SPEED AND CONNECTION SPEED

When you make a dialup connection, there are (at least) three separate
components to the connection.  Assuming you are dialing up from a PC,
there is the connection between your PC and your (originating) modem, the
connection between the two modems, and the connection between the "other"
(answering) modem and whatever device it is attached to.  Each of part
of the connection can be running at a different speed:

1. LOCAL INTERFACE SPEED: The speed used on the connection between
   your PC (or terminal or workstation) and your modem.

2. CONNECTION SPEED: The speed of the connection between the two modems,
   based on the modulation technique that they negotiate with each other.

3. REMOTE INTERFACE SPEED: The speed of the connection between the remote
   (answering) modem and the terminal server.

SPEED BUFFERING

When originating a call, most modems change their interface speeds to
match the negotiated connection speed automatically.  When that happens,
your communications software must also change its speed at the same time.
For example, if you dial at 9600 bps, but the remote modem answers at 1200
bps, your modem will print a message like:

  CONNECT 1200

which your communication software takes as a signal to change its
interface speed to 1200 bps before attempting to go "online" with the
remote computer or service.

Most modern modems can be configured to fix their interface speed at a
given value, rather than change it according to the connection speed.
This is desirable when using data compression.  In this case, the
CONNECTION SPEED (or MODULATION SPEED) between the two modems is
different from the INTERFACE SPEED between the modem and the computer.
The modem performs the speed conversion between its telephone side and
its data side.

ERROR CORRECTION

After the modems have agreed on a modulation technique, they might
also try to negotiate an error-detection and -correction method:

  MNP Level 1, 2, 3, or 4
  CCITT V.42 = LAPM
  Telebit PEP (proprietary, unknown)
  US Robotics HST (proprietary, unknown)

When modems' initial error-control methods do not agree, automatic
fallback is usually as follows:

  V.42 -> MNP 4 -> MNP 3 -> MNP 2 -> MNP 1 -> none

When PEP, HST, or other proprietary methods are involved, special
configuration settings are needed on the modems to specify the fallback
sequence.

Please note that no connection can ever be free of errors.  The error
correction technique used between the modems might be extremely effective,
but it is not foolproof.  More to the point, the connections between the
modems and the computers are not error-corrected, nor or the data paths
within the computers.  Thus it is still quite common to experience data
loss or corruption, even on an error-corrected modem connection.  Common
causes include: buffer overflows (often due to a lack of adequate flow
control between the modem and the computer -- see below), interrupt
conflicts, loose connectors, and malfunctioning devices.

GLOSSARY

  LAPM = Link Access Protocol for Modems
  MNP  = Microcom Networking Protocol, proprietary,
         but licensed by most modem makers.

DATA COMPRESSION

Modems may incorporate data compression methods to increase the effective
throughput of your data beyond the actual connection speed.  Compression
is possible only if (a) error correction is also being done, and (b) the
interface speed between the computer and the modem is higher than the
connection speed between the two modems.

  MNP Level 3 = 108% efficiency by removing start & stop bits (synchronous)
  MNP Level 4 = 120% efficiency by optimizing modem-to-modem protocol
  MNP Level 5 = True compression on top of Level 4, efficiency depends
      on data
  V.42bis     = True compression, efficiency depends on data
  Telebit PEP (proprietary, unknown)
  US Robotics HST (proprietary, unknown)

Effectiveness of MNP 5 and V.42bis compression vary between 0% and 400% or
higher, depending on the nature of the data.  Compression fallback:

  V.42bis -> MNP 5 -> none

When PEP or HST is involved, special configuration settings are needed
on the modem to specify how these fit into the fallback sequence.

FLOW CONTROL

"Flow control" is the method by which one device can control the rate at
which another device sends data to it.  There are various methods of flow
control.  The two most commonly used in dialup data communication are:

 . RTS/CTS (Request To Send / Clear To Send) "hardware" flow control is
   the most effective method.  It uses special wires in the cable,
   separate from the data wires, to control the flow of data.  It is
   used between two devices that are immediately connected, such as a
   computer and a modem.

 . XON/XOFF "software" flow control is less effective and more risky
   because it mixes flow control characters (Control-S and Control-Q) with
   the data.  These characters are subject to delay, loss, and corruption,
   and also cause transparency problems with host applications like EMACS.
   Software flow control should be used only if hardware flow control is
   unavailable.

When using error correction or compression, or modems that are capable of
retraining, it is essential to enable an effective form of flow control
between each modem and the computer (or terminal, or other device) it is
immediately connected to.  Without effective flow control, data will be
lost when one device sends data faster than the other one can receive it.

FURTHER READING

Gianone, C., "Using MS-DOS Kermit", Second Edition, Digital Press (1992),
Chapter 4, "Cables, Connectors, and Modems", pp.27-36.

da Cruz, F., and C. Gianone, "Using C-Kermit", Digital Press (1993),
Appendix II, "A Condensed Guide to Serial Data Communications", pp.359-373.

Your modem manual.
