Compiled from postings to rec.games.abstract by

Felix Lee <flee@cs.psu.edu> on 10-Nov-1992
Mark-Jason Dominus <mjd@saul.cis.upenn.edu> 11-Nov-1992
Gareth McCaughan <gjm11@cus.cam.ac.uk> 10-Nov-1992

Nomic was invented by Peter Suber.  Douglas Hofstadter wrote about it
in one of his Metamagical Themas columns.

Nomic isn't an abstract strategy game, but it's an abstract form of
rule-making and legislation.

At the end of this article, the complete initial rules to Nomic.  The
rules are a bit complex, so here's quick tour.

The idea behind Nomic is to change the rules of Nomic.  The game can
be completely different at the end than it was at the start.

The basic play is explained in rule 202: a player proposes a rule
change, all the players vote on it, and if the vote succeeds, the
change is immediately incorporated into the game.

However, note that rule 202 itself can be changed.  If a player
successfully changes this rule, then the way you play Nomic changes,
and the game proceeds from there.

Nomic is completely self-reflexive.  Every rule of Nomic can be
changed, including the rule that says you can change rules.  In
principle, Nomic can become any other game.

The winner of the game is either
a. the first person to reach 100 points;
b. the first person who cannot finish his turn according to the rules.
(but the definition of the winner can also be changed).

To keep some sort of structure, Nomic's rules are divided into
Immutable rules and Mutable rules.  Mutable rules can be changed in
any way.  Immutable rules can only be transmuted into Mutable rules,
by unanimous vote.  So actually changing an Immutable rule takes more
effort.  This rule is itself an Immutable rule, so it too can be
changed, with effort.

It's probably best to read all the Mutable rules before reading the
Immutable rules.  The Immutable rules tend to be meta-rules, and they
make more sense in context.


This appeared in rec.games.misc in 1987; it's also in Dougls R
Hofstadter's book _Metamagical themas_:


		    INITIAL SET OF RULES OF NOMIC
			

			I.  *Immutable Rules*


101	All players must always abide by all the rules then in effect,
	in the form in which they are then in effect.  The rules in the
	Initial Set are in effect whenever a game begins.  The Initial 	
	Set consists of Rules 101-116 (immutable) and 201-213 (mutable).

102	Initially, rules in the 100's are immutable and rules in the 200's
 	are mutable.  Rules subsequently enacted or transmuted (i.e. 
	changed from immutable to mutable or vice versa) may be immutable or
	mutable regardless of their numbers, and rules in the Initial Set
	may be transmuted regardless of their numbers.

103	A rule change is any of the following:  (1)  the enactment, repeal,
	or amendment of a mutable rule; (2) the enactment, repeal, or amend-
	ment of an amendment, or (3) the transmutation of an immutable rule 
	into a mutable rule, or vice versa.  (Note:  This definition implies
	that, at least initially, all new rules are mutable.  Immutable rules, 
	as long as they are immutable, may not be amended or repealed; mutable
	rules, as long as they are mutable, may be amended or repealed.  No
	rule is absolutely immune to change.)

104	All rule changes proposed in the proper way shall be voted on.  
	They will be adopted if and only if they receive the required number
	of votes.

105	Every player is an eligible voter.  Every eligible voter must par-
	ticipate in every vote on rule changes.

106	Any proposed rule change must be written down before it is voted on.
	If adopted, it must guide play in the form in which it was voted on.
	
107	No rule change may take effect earlier than the moment of the comple-
	tion of the vote that adopted it, even if its wording explicitly
	states otherwise.  No rule change may have retroactive application.

108	Each proposed rule change shall be given a rank-order number (ordinal
	number) for reference.  The numbers shall begin with 301, and each
	rule change proposed in the proper way shall receive the next suc-
	cessive integer, whether or not the proposal is adopted.

	If a rule is repealed and then re-enacted, it receives the ordinal
	number of the proposal to re-enact it.  If a rule is amended or 
	transmuted, it receives the ordinal number of the proposal to
	amend or transmute it.  If an amendment is amended or repealed, 
	the entire rule of which it is a part receives the ordinal number
	of the proposal to amend or repeal the amendment.

109	Rule changes that transmute immutable rules into mutable rules 
	may be adopted if and only if the vote is unanimous among the
	eligible voters.

110	Mutable rules that are inconsistent in any way with some immutable
	rule (except by proposing to transmute it) are wholly void and
 	without effect.  They do not implicitly transmute immutable rules
	into mutable rules and at the same time amend them.  Rule changes
	that transmute immutable rules into mutable rules will be effective
	if and only if they explicitly state their transmuting effect.

111	If a rule change as proposed is unclear, ambiguous, paradoxical,
	or clearly destructive of play, or if it arguably consists of two
	or more rule changes compounded or is an amendment that makes no
	difference, or if it is otherwise of questionable value, then
	the other players may suggest amendments or argue against the 
	proposal before the vote.  A reasonable amount of time must be 
	allowed for this debate.  The proponent decides the final form
	in which the proposal is to be voted on and decides the time to
	end debate and vote.  The only cure for a bad proposal is preven-
	tion:  a negative vote.

112	The state of affairs that constitutes winning may not be changed from
	achieving n points to any other state of affairs.  However, the 
	magnitude of n and the means of earning points may be changed, and
	rules that establish a winner when play cannot continue may be
 	enacted and (while they are mutable) be amended or repealed.

113	A player always has the option to forfeit the game rather than 
	continue to play or incur a game penalty.  No penalty worse than
	losing, in the judgement of the player to incur it, may be imposed.

114	There must always be at least one mutable rule.  The adoption of rule
	changes must never become completely impermissible.

115	Rule changes that affect rules needed to allow or apply rule changes
	are as permissible as other rule changes.  Even rule changes that
	amend or repeal their own authority are permissible.  No rule change
	or type of move is impermissible solely on account of the self-
	reference or self-application of a rule.

116	Whatever is not explicitly prohibited or regulated by a rule is
	permitted and unregulated, with the sole exception of changing the
	rules, which is permitted only when a rule or set of rules 
	explicitly or implicitly permits it.



			 II.  *Mutable Rules*


201	Players shall alternate in clockwise order, taking one whole turn 
	apiece.  Turns may not be skipped or passed, and parts of turns
	may not be omitted.  All players begin with zero points.

202	One turn consists of two parts, in this order:  (1) proposing one
	rule change and having it voted on, and (2) throwing one die once
	and adding the number of its points on its face to one's score.

203	A rule change is adopted if and only if the vote is unanimous among
	the eligible voters.

204	If and when rule changes can be adopted without unanimity, the
	players who vote agains winning proposals shall receive 10 points
	apiece.

205	An adopted rule change takes full effect at the moment of the com-
	pletion of the vote that adopted it.

206	When a proposed rule change is defeated, the player who proposed it
	loses 10 points.

207	Each player always has exactly one vote.

208	The winner is the first player to achieve 100 (positive) points.

209	At no time may there be more than 25 mutable rules.

210	Players may not conspire or consult on the making of future rule
	changes unless they are teammates.

211	If two or more mutable rules conflict with one another, or if two
	or more immutable rules conflict with one another, then the rule
	with the lowest ordinal number takes precedence.

	If at least one of the rules in conflict explicitly says of itself
	that it defers to another rule (or type of rule) or takes prece-
	dence over another rule (or type of rule), then such provisions
	shall supersede the numerical method for determining precedence.

	If two or more rules claim to take precedence over one another or to
	defer to one another, then the numerical method must again govern.

212	If players disagree about the legality of a move or the interpretation
	or application of a rule, then the player preceding the one moving is
	to be the Judge and to decide the question.  Disagreement, for the
	purposes of this rule, may be created by the insistence of any
	player.  Such a process is called *invoking judgement*.

	When judgement has been invoked, the next player may not begin his
	or her turn own turn without the consent of a majority of the other 
	players.

	The Judge's judgement may be overruled only by a unanimous vote of the
	other players, taken before the next turn is begun.  If a Judge's
	judgement is overruled, the player preceding the Judge in the playing
	order becomes the new Judge for the question, except that no player
	is to be Judge during his own turn or during the turn of a teammate.

	Unless a Judge is overruled, one Judge settles all questions arising
	from the game until the next turn is begun, including questions as
	to his or her own legitimacy and jurisdiction as Judge.

	New Judges are not bound by the decisions of old Judges.  New Judges
	may, however, settle only those queistions on which the players 
	currently disagree and that affect the completion of the turn in
	which judgement was invoked.  All decisions by Judges shall be in
	accordance with all the rules then in effect; but when the rules
	are silent, inconsistent, or unclear on the point at issue, then
	the Judge's only guides shall be common morality, common logic, and
	the spirit of the game.

213	If the rules are changed so that further play is impossible, or if
	the legality of a move is impossible to determine with finality, or
	if by the Judge's best reasoning, not overruled, a move appears 
	equally legal and illegal, then the first player who is unable to 
	complete a turn is the winner.

	This rule takes precedence over every other rule determining the 
	winner.

Mark-Jason Dominus added:

For net play, we found it expedient to add the following rules:

001:  Rules with numbers 001-013 are typeless; they may not be amended,
      transmuted, or overruled.

002:  Rule 101 is amended to say "...The initial set consists of Rules
      001-013 (typeless), Rules 101-116 (immutable) and 201-213 (mutable)."

003:  Rule 102 is amended to say "...rules in the initial set numbered 100
      or greater may be transmuted regardless of their numbers"

004:  Rule 103 is amended to say "...No rule is completely immune to
      change, unless it be a typeless rule."

005:  The first sentence of rule 106 is replaced with: "Any proposed rule
      change must be mailed to the Moderator before it is voted on.  The
      Moderator will then distribute the proposal to the players to be voted
      on."

006:  To rule 110 is added:  "Mutable or immutable rules that are inconsistent
      in any way with typeless rules are wholly void and without effect."

007:  The first sentence of rule 201 is amended to read:  "Players shall
      alternate in an order to be determined randomly at the start of the
      game by the Moderator."

008:  All dice rolls required in the course of the game will be performed by
      the Moderator, and the results will be reported to all the players.

      [Note that this clarifies rule 202(2).]

009:  Rule 210 is entirely null and void.

010:  In all situations in which the players must vote, the votes must be
      mailed to the Moderator, who shall report to each player on the outcome
      of the vote and on the votes of the individual players.

011:  The first sentence of rule 212 is amended to read "...then the
      Moderator is to be the Judge and to decide the question."

012:  The moderator shall keep records of all rule change proposals, votes,
      and other game business of which he is aware, and shall distribute it
      to any player upon demand, as well as at times he deems appropriate.

013:  The Moderator is not a player; he shall make no moves, cast no votes,
      join in any discussion (except where specifically required; i.e.
      rule 212 as amended by rule 011), score no points, and in general,
      participate in the game only as a moderator, judge, and impartial
      observer.

-------

If I had it to do over again, I think I'd trash rule 011, and replace it
with a rule that says that the moderator can kick someone out if they
don't send in their move before a reasonable amount of time has gone by.
