From: Webmaster <webmaster@darpa.mil>
To: "'Denis Howe'" <dbh@doc.ic.ac.uk>
Subject: RE: DARPA/ARPA
Date: Thu, 15 Jul 1999 09:12:27 -0400

Mr. Howe,

Your originating message is generally correct.  ARPA became DARPA in 1972,
and again on March 11, 1996.  The numbers that you mention (240 personnel;
$2B budget) "on average" are relatively accurate, however, the personnel
assigned or on loan to DARPA changes rapidly and often, as most programs
last around 2-4 years.

The following is a brief history of DARPA.  Thank you for your interest.

DARPA was created as the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA), by Public
Law 85-325 and DoD Directive 5105.41, in February 1958.  Its creation was
directly attributed to the launching of Sputnik and to U.S. realization that
the Soviet Union had developed the capacity to rapidly exploit military
technology.  Additionally, the political and defense communities recognized
the need for a high-level DoD organization to formulate and execute R&D
projects that would expand the frontiers of technology beyond the immediate
and specific requirements of the Military Services and their laboratories.
In pursuit of this mission, DARPA has developed and transferred technology
programs encompassing a wide range of scientific disciplines which address
the full spectrum of national security needs.

From 1958-1965, ARPA's emphasis centered on major national issues, including
space, ballistic missile defense, and nuclear test detection.  In 1960, all
of its civilian space programs were transferred to the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration (NASA) and the military space programs to the
individual Services.  This allowed DARPA to concentrate its efforts on the
DEFENDER (defense against ballistic missiles), VELA (nuclear test
detection), and AGILE (counterinsurgency R&D) Programs, and to begin work on
computer processing, behavioral sciences, and materials sciences.  The
DEFENDER and AGILE Programs formed the foundation of DARPA sensor,
surveillance, and directed energy R&D, particularly in the study of radars,
infrared sensing, and x-ray/gamma ray detection.

In the late 1960s, with the transfer of these mature programs to the
Services, ARPA redefined its role and concentrated on a diverse set of
relatively small, essentially exploratory research programs.  The Agency was
renamed the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) in 1972, and
in the early 1970s, it emphasized direct energy programs, information
processing, and tactical technologies.  In the area of information
processing, DARPA made great strides through the evolution of ARPANET
(telecommunications network and precursor to the Internet) and research in
the artificial intelligence (AI) fields of speech recognition and signal
processing.

From 1976-1981, DARPA's major thrusts were dominated by air, land, sea, and
space technology, such as follow-on forces attack with standoff weapons and
associated Command, Control, and Communications; tactical armor and
anti-armor programs; infrared sensing for space-based surveillance;
high-energy laser technology for space-based missile defense; antisubmarine
warfare; advanced cruise missiles; advanced aircraft; defense applications
of advanced computing; and STEALTH technology.  These large-scale
technological program demonstrations were joined by integrated circuit
research, which resulted in submicron electronic technology and electron
devices that evolved into the Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Program
and the Congressionally-mandated charged particle beam program.  Many of the
successful programs were transitioned to the Services, such as the HAVE BLUE
which culminated in the F-117A Black Jet, and the foundation technologies in
automatic target recognition, space based sensing, propulsion, and materials
that were transferred to the Strategic Defense Initiative Organization
(SDIO), now known as the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization (BMDO). 

During the 1980s, the attention of the Agency was centered on information
processing and aircraft-related programs, including the National Aerospace
Plane (NASP) or Hypersonic Research Program.  The Strategic Computing
Program enabled DARPA to exploit advanced processing and networking
technologies and to rebuild and strengthen relationships with universities
after the Vietnam War.  In addition, DARPA began to pursue new concepts for
small, lightweight satellites (LIGHTSAT) and directed new programs regarding
defense manufacturing, submarine technology, and armor/anti-armor.

In the 1990s, the Agency is energized to develop revolutionary new
technologies, both in products and processes, that will form the basis for
new defense and civilian capabilities in the next century.  Starting with
basic technologies such as electronics and materials processing, DARPA will
create new computers, sensors, and communications devices; develop new ways
of manufacturing; and apply these creations using advanced technology
demonstrators in operational environments to affect the total R&D process
from concept development through lifecycle logistics support technologies.

Current program descriptions and program manager contact information is
posted within each of the Tech Offices' webpages, which can be accessed
from: http://www.darpa.mil/org2.html.

DARPA Webmaster Support
