From gary Thu Jun  1 11:35 BST 1989 remote from hirst4
>From davet Thu Jun  1 11:30:50 1989 remote from gec-rl-hrc
To: Gary.Scott@hrc63, Aktar.Somalya@hrc63, Chris.Wheeler@hrc63,
    Peter.Kelly@hrc63, kelvin@hirst4
Subject: Ten
Date: Thu, 01 Jun 89 11:30:25 +0000
From: Dave Thorpe <davet@hrc63>
Message-ID:  <8906011130.aa29688@lemon.gec-rl-hrc.co.uk>



Three women are sunning themselves on the beach, one catholic, one
protestant, and one JAP (Jewish American Princess).  Suddenly, a man 
runs by wearing nothing but a paper bag over his head.  When he has
passed, the women look at each other self-conciously.

The catholic says, "At least it wasn't my husband"
The protestant says, "At least it wasn't my boyfriend"
The JAP says, "Why, he wasn't even a member of the country club"

-----

    There's an engineer, a physicist, and a mathematician and they
are all attending a convention at some hotel.  A fire breaks out
when everyone is asleep.  The engineer wakes up, smells the smoke,
gets up, runs out into the hallway, runs to the nearest firehose,
and douses the entire room with water.  All of the engineer's
possesions were wet, but at least he was safe.
    The physicist wakes up, smells the smoke, whips out pencil
and paper, writes a few equations down, then rushes into the bathroom
to fill a cup of water, and then throws the cup of water in the
exact spot in the room to douse all the flames.
    The mathematician wakes up, smells the smoke, thinks for a minute,
then rushes into the bathroom, fills a cup of water, lights a match,
sticks the match in the cup.  Seeing that flame was extinguished,
the mathematician proclaims, "Ah!  A solution exists."  Then he
goes back to sleep.

-----

    Three men are in a hot-air balloon.  Soon, they find themselves
lost in a canyon somewhere.  One of the three men says, "I've got an
idea.  We can call for help in this canyon and the echo will carry
our voices far."
    So he leans over the basket and yells out, "Helllloooooo!
Where are we?" (They hear the echo several times).
    15 minutes later, they hear this echoing voice: "Helllloooooo!
You're lost!!"
    One of the men says, "That must have been a mathematician."
    Puzzled, one of the other men asks, "Why do you say that?"
    The reply: "For three reasons.  (1) he took a long time to
answer, (2) he was absolutely correct, and (3) his answer was
absolutely useless."

-----

    An engineer and a mathematician are in a room with one door.  Both
of them are asked (one at a time) to go into the next room, where they
will find a pot of water and a stove, and boil the pot of water.
The engineer goes into the next room, sees the pot of water sitting
on a table, puts it on the stove, turns on the stove, and waits until
it boils.  A little bit later (the room is reset for the mathematician),
the mathematician goes into the next room, sees the pot sitting on
the table, puts it on the stove, turns on the stove, and waits until
it boils.
    Now both of them are asked to do this again.  However, this time the
pot of water is on the floor.  The engineer sees the pot of water on
the floor, puts it on the stove, and waits until it boils.  The
mathematician, however, sees the pot of water on the floor, puts it
on the table and proclaims, "I've solved this problem already."

-----

	Knock, knock!
	Who's there?
	Bella!
	Bella who?
	Bella no ringa, so I knocka!

-----

Arthur was sitting outside his local pub one day, enjoying a quiet pint and
generally feeling good about himself, when a nun suddenly appears at his
table and starts decrying the evils of drink.

"You should be ashamed of yourself young man!  Drinking is a Sin!  Alcohol
is the blood of the devil!"

Now Arthur gets pretty annoyed about this, and goes on the offensive.
"How do *you* know, Sister?"

"My Mother Superior told me so"

"But have you ever had a drink yourself?  How can you be sure that what you
are saying is right?"

"Don't be ridiculous - of course I have never taken alcohol myself"

"Then let me buy you a drink - if you still believe afterwards that it is
evil I will give up drink for life"

"How could I, a Nun, sit outside this public house drinking?!"

"I'll get the barman to put it in a teacup for you, them no-one will know"

The Nun reluctantly agrees, so Arthur goes inside to the bar.

"Another pint for me, and a triple vodka on the rocks", then he lowers his
voice and says to the barman "... and could you put the vodka in a teacup?"

"Oh no!  It's not that bloody Nun again is it?"

How many accountants does it take to screw in a light bulb?
What kind of answer did you have in mind?

How many actors does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Only one.  They don't like to share the spotlight.

How many Americans does it take to screw in a light bulb?
1)  One.
2)  Two.  One to replace it and one to tell him it was burned out (in
    states that still have car-inspection laws.)
3)  Three.  One to stand on the ladder, and two to carry enough light
    bulbs until one is found that isn't defective.

How many Amish does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Amish don't have light bulbs.  They bake pies.

How many anarchists does it take to screw in a light bulb?
All of them.

How many assholes does it take to screw in a light bulb?
None.  Assholes never see the light anyway.

How many astronomers does it take to screw in a light bulb?
None.  Astronomers prefer the dark.

How many auto mechanics does it take to screw in a light bulb?
1)  Two.  One to try to put in the wrong lamp, and one to replace the
    broken socket.
2)  Six.  One to force it with a hammer and five to go out for more
    bulbs.

How many Ayatollahs does it take to screw in a light bulb?
None.  There were no light bulbs in the 13th Century.

How many babysitters does it take to screw in a light bulb?
None.  They don't make Pampers small enough.

How many Baltimore Orioles does it take to change a tire?
One.  Unless it's a blowout, then the whole team shows up.

How many bankers does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Four.  One to hold the bulb and three to try to remember the combination.

How many Bell Labs Vice Presidents does it take to screw in a light bulb?
That's proprietary information.  Answer available from AT&T on payment
of license fee.

How many Beverly Hills realtors does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Three.  One to screw it in and two to learn Arabic.

How many bikers does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Two.  One to change the bulb, and the other to kick the switch.

How many bluegrass musicians does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Two.  One to screw it in and one to complain that it's electrified.

How many board meetings does it take to get a light bulb changed?
This topic was resumed from last week's discussion, but is incomplete
pending resolution of some action items.  It will be continued next week.
Meanwhile...

How many brewers does it take to screw in a light bulb?
One third less than for a regular bulb.

How many investment brokers does it take to screw in a light bulb?
1)  MY GOD!!  IT BURNT OUT!!  SELL ALL MY G.E. STOCK NOW!!!!!
2)  Two.  One to take out the bulb and drop it, and the other to try and
    sell it before it crashes.

How many Zen Buddhists does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Two.  One to screw in the light bulb, and one to not screw in the light bulb.

How many Mahayana Buddhists does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Four.  One to screw in the light bulb, one to not screw in the light bulb, 
one to not not screw in the light bulb, and one to not do any of these.

How many bureaucrats does it take to screw in a light bulb?
1)  Two.  One to assure the everything possible is being done while the other
    screws the bulb into the water faucet.
2)  Five.  One to change the bulb and four to file an Environmental
    Impact Statement.
3)  One to spot the burned-out bulb, his supervisor to authorize a
    requisition, a requisition typist, twelve clerks to file the
    requisition copies, a mail clerk to deliver the requisition to the
    purchasing department, a purchasing agent to order the bulb, a clerk
    to forward the purchasing order, a clerk to mail-order a receiving
    clerk to receive the bulb ...
4)  Two.  One to screw it in and one to screw it up.
5)  None.  We contract out for things like that.

How many cabbage patch dolls does it take to screw in a light bulb?
The question is irrelevant since you couldn't find the dolls even if
you knew how many.

How many Californians does it take to screw in a light bulb?
1)  Silly, Californians don't screw in a light bulb, they screw in hot tubs.
2)  Six.  One to turn the bulb, one for support, and four to relate
    to the experience.

How many Carl Sagans does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Billions and billions.

How many Chinese Red Guards does it take to screw in a light bulb?
100,000 - to give the bulb a cultural revolution.

How many Christians does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Three.  But they're really only one.

How many civil servants does it take to change the light bulb?
45.  One to change the bulb, and 44 to do the paperwork.

How many Columbia students does it take to screw in a light bulb?
One.  But he gets three credits.

How many Communists does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Two.  One to screw it in, and a second to hand out leaflets.

How many conservatives does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Five.  One to change it and the others to sit around and talk about
how much they liked the old one.

How many consultants does it take to screw in a light bulb?
1)  I'll have an estimate for you a week from Monday.
2)  Two.  One always leaves in the middle of the project.

How many contras does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Only one, but he needs one Iranian, one Israeli, four Canadians,
an Arab, twenty Swiss, and Afghan, and Oliver North to help him.

How many cops does it take to screw in a light bulb?
1)  None.  It turned itself in.
2)  Just one, but he is never around when you need him.

How many cryonicists does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Four.  One to ensure that the light bulb is certifiably dead, one to
perfuse it with cryoprotectants, one to slowly cool it to liquid
nitrogen temperature, and one to wait 200 years for technology to
advance sufficiently to revive it.

How many data base people does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Three.  One to write the light bulb removal program, one to write the
light bulb insertion program, and one to act as a light bulb administrator
to make sure nobody else tries to change the light bulb at the same time.

How many DEC employees does it take to screw in a light bulb?
2 People - Preliminary discussion on concept of change.
1 Person - Devise and write formal bulb architecture.
2 People - Feasability study and timetable of events.
2 People - Produce four utilities to reduce screw-in time
1 Person - Maintain ISO and DEC standards
4 People - Commonality task force on bulb change.
15 People - Change bulb.
5 People - Perform bulb functional test.
2 People - Perform bulb load test.
3 People - Perform bulb regression test.
1 Person - Perform bulb performance analysis.
1 Person - Perform bulb bottleneck analysis.
1 Person - Follow-up study (bulb merge feasibility).
1 Person - Interface with utilities commission.
1 Person - Interface with users. (Did they want incandescent
	   when we only supply non-tunable fluorescent point 
	   product?) BAX (Bulbs Are eXpensive)!
5 People - Perform BOSE (Build Other Socket Enhancements).
	   compatibility architecture/study.
3 People - Perform VIA (Voltage Increases Amps) phase 2
	   compatibility architecture/study.
2 People - Ensure form (round, square, clear/frosted)
	   follows function (wattage, 120/240 volts, 
	   visible/ultra-violet, flashing, flood/spot).
3 People - Implement temporary alternative bulb socket for already
	   existing, successful, and profitable socket (bulb-in-one).
5 People - Determine how to market/package/distribute temporary
	   alternative bulb socket.
8 People - Determine how to perform bulb change product split
           (Control:  switches, dimmers; versus implementation:
	   screw-in torque, recovery strategies).
1 Person - Interface with utilities commission QA group.
1 Person - Submit to BDC (Bulb Distribution Center).
1 Person - Set up BPR (Bulb Problem Reports) system.
9 People - Answer customer BPRs.
11 People - Football team to challenge bulb changers.

How many disarmament folks does it take to screw in a light bulb?
They won't, because:
	1. "If we change our bulb, they will just change theirs to a
brighter one, so where will it all end?"
	2. "We already have enough bulbs to illuminate the entire world
three times over."
	3. "We shouldn't spend money for light bulbs as long as anyone
is hungry anywhere."
	4. "We don't know what effect all of this artificial light will
have on the future of mankind."
	5. "Nature provides us with all the light we need; we just haven't
learned to husband it yet."
	6. "Artificial light isn't aesthetically correct."
	7. "The candle is more traditional, and it uses no electricity."
	8. "It is the responsibility of the Federal Government to provide
light to all Americans, without regard to race, age, creed, color, sex 
(anatomic), sex (persuasion), religion, socio-economic status, national origin,
or need."
	9. "I'm not about to touch anything that has WATT written on it!"

How many doctors does it take to screw in a light bulb?
1)  Three.  One to find a bulb specialist, one to find a bulb
    installation specialist, and one to bill it all to Medicare.
2)  That depends on whether it has health insurance.
3)  Only one, but he has to have a nurse to tell him which end to screw in.

How many dope addicts does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Two.  One to roll it and one to light it up.
 
How many dull people does it take to screw in a light bulb?
One.

How many economists does it take to screw in a light bulb? 
Two.  One to assume the ladder, and one to change the light bulb.

How many Thomas Edisons does it take to screw in a light bulb?
None.  He doesn't change them, he makes them.

How many editors does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Two.  One to change the bulb and one to issue a rejection slip to
the old bulb.

How many efficiency experts does it take to replace a light bulb?
None.  Efficiency experts replace only dark bulbs.

How many emergency room technicians does it take to screw in a light bulb?
One, but the bulb will have to wait forty-five minutes in the waiting room
first.
 
How many members of the U.S.S. Enterprise does it take to change a
light bulb?
Scotty will report to Captain Kirk that the light bulb in the
Engineering Section is burnt out, to which Kirk will send Bones
to pronounce the bulb dead. Scotty, after checking around, notices
that they have no more new light bulbs, and complains that he can't
see in the dark to tend to his engines. Kirk must make an emergency
stop at the next uncharted planet, Alpha Regula IV, to procure a
light bulb from the natives. Kirk, Spock, Bones, Sulu, and 3 red
shirt security officers beam down. The 3 security officers are
promply killed by the natives, and the rest of the landing party
is captured. Meanwhile, back in orbit, Scotty notices a Klingon ship
approaching and must warp out of orbit to escape detection.
Bones cures the native king who is suffering from the flu, and as
a reward the landing party is set free and given all of the light bulbs 
they can carry. Scotty cripples the Klingon ship and warps back to the
planet just in time to beam up Kirk et. al. The new bulb is inserted, 
and the Enterprise continues with its five year mission.

How many ergonomicists does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Five.  Four to decide which way the bulb OUGHT to turn, and ...

How many EST followers does it take to screw in a light bulb?
A roomful.  They take turns as the leader tells them what rotten and 
worthless bulb screwers they are.  No one is allowed to leave the room
to go to the bathroom while the bulb screwing is in progress.

How many Polacks does it take to screw in a light bulb?
10.  One to hold the bulb and nine to rotate the ladder.

How many strong Polacks does it take to screw in a light bulb?
115.  One to hold the bulb and 114 to rotate the house.

How many Greek gods does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Two.  One to hold the bulb and the other to rotate the planet.

How many European ballet dancers does it take to screw in a light bulb?
None.  They like Danzig in the dark.

How many evolutionists does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Only one, but it takes eight million years.

How many existentialists does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Two.  One to screw it in and one to observe how the light bulb itself symbolizes
a single incandescent beacon of subjective reality in a netherworld of endless
absurdity reaching out toward a maudlin cosmos of nothingness.

How many fatalists does it take to screw in a light bulb?
What does it matter, we're all gonna die anyway.

How many Federal employees does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Sorry, that item has been cut from the budget!

How many Feminists does it take to screw in a light bulb?
1)  That's not funny!!!
2)  Two.  One to change the bulb and one to write about how it feels.
3)  Three.  One to screw it in and two to talk about the sexual
    implications.
4)  Four.  One to change it, and three to write about how the
    bulb is exploiting the socket.
5)  Three.  One to change the bulb, and two to secretly wish they were 
    the socket.
6)  Two.  One to screw in the light bulb and one to kick the balls off any
    man trying to help the first one.

How many firemen does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Four.  One to change the bulb and three to cut a hole in the roof.

How many folk singers does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Two.  One to change the bulb, and one to write a song about how good the
old light bulb was.

How many football players does it take to screw in a light bulb?
The entire team!  And they all get a semester's credit for it!

How many Tampa Bay Buccaneers does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Two.  One to screw it in and one to recover the fumble.

How many frat guys does it take to screw in a light bulb?
1)  Three.  One to screw it in, and the other two to help him down off
    the keg.
2)  Five.  One to hold the bulb, and four to guzzle beer until the
    room spins.

How many fundamentalists does it take to screw in a light bulb?
The Bible doesn't mention light bulbs.

How many gardeners does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Just one.  The new light bulbs are just as easy to change as older,
heavier ones.

How many gays does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Two.  One to screw it in and the other to say, "Fabulous!  Fabulous!"

How many generals does it take to screw in a light bulb?
1,000,001.  One to change the bulb and 1,000,000 to rebuild
civilization to the point where they need light bulbs again.

How many gorillas does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Only one, but it sure takes a shitload of light bulbs!

How many graduate students does it take to screw in a light bulb?
1)  Only one, but it may take upwards of five years for him to get it done.
2)  It all depends on the size of the grant.
3)  Two, and a professor to take credit.

How many grocery store cashiers does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Are you kidding?  They won't even change a five dollar bill.

How many hackers does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Huh?  You mean it's dark in here?

How many hardware guys does it take to screw in a light bulb?
"Well, the diagnostics say it's fine, buddy, so it's a software problem."

How many Harvard students does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Just one.  He holds the light bulb and the universe revolves around him.

How many humor theorists does it take to submit a light bulb joke?
300.  One to change the bulb and 299 to analyze it to death.

How many IBM engineers does it take to screw in a light bulb?
None.  They just let Marketing explain that "Dead Bulb" is a feature.

How many IBM PC owners does it take to screw in light bulb?
Only one, but he'll have to go out and buy the light bulb adaptor 
card first, which is extra.

How many IBMers does it take to screw in a light bulb?
100.  Ten to do it, and 90 to write document number GC7500439-0001,
Multitasking Incandescent Source System Facility, of which 10% of the
pages state only "This page intentionally left blank", and 20% of the
definitions are of the form "A ...... consists of sequences of
non-blank characters separated by blanks".

How many members of the Impossible Missions Force does it take to screw in
a light bulb?
Five.  While Cinnamon creates a diversion by wearing a skimpy dress, I use
a tiny narcotic dart to knock out the fascist dictator and remove his body.
Rollin, wearing a plastic mask, masquerades as the dictator long enough for
Barney to sneak up to the next floor, drill a hole down into the light
fixture, remove the burned-out bulb, and replace it with a new super-high-
wattage model of his own design.  Meanwhile, Willie has driven up to the
door in a laundry truck.  Just before Rollin's real identity is revealed,
we escape to the laundry truck, drive to the airfield, and return to the
United States.

How many Indiana University students does it take to screw in a light bulb?
1)  You ever wonder why it's so dark in Bloomington?
2)  All of them, since changing light bulbs is the only kind of job they
    can get after they graduate.

How many Iranians does it take to screw in a light bulb?
100.  One to screw it in and 99 to hold the house hostage.

How many Japanese industrialists does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Three.  One to make sure the new bulb is not foreign, one to change
the bulb, and one to look into the export potential of the old bulb.

How many jerks who ask stupid questions does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Change it to what?

How many Jewish-American Princesses does it take to screw in a light bulb?
1)  Two.  One to get a Tab and one to call Da-a-addy.
2)  What?!  And ruin my nails???

How many Jewish mothers does it take to screw in a light bulb?
None.  ("That's all right, I'll just sit here in the dark.")

How many Jews does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Three.  One to call the cleaning lady and the other two to feel guilty
about having to call the cleaning lady.

How many jugglers does it take to screw in a light bulb?
One, but it takes at least three light bulbs.

How many junkies does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Oh wow, is it like dark, man?

How many Kentuckians does it take to screw in a light bulb?
1)  All of them.
2)  Only one.  They'll screw anything.

How many KGB agents does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Two.  One to screw it in and the other to check the microphones.

How many lawyers does it take to screw in a light bulb?
1)  How many can you afford?
2)  Fifty four. Eight to argue, one to get a continuance, one to object,
    one to demur, two to research precedents, one to dictate a letter, 
    one to stipulate, five to turn in their time cards, one to depose,
    one to write interrogatories, two to settle, one to order a 
    secretary to change the bulb, and twenty-eight to bill for 
    professional services.
3)  It only takes one lawyer to change your light bulb to his light bulb.
4)  You won't find a lawyer who can screw in a light bulb. Now, if you're
    looking for a lawyer to screw a light bulb ...
5)  Whereas the party of the first part, also known as "Lawyer", and the party
    of the second part, also known as "Light Bulb", do hereby and forthwith
    agree to a transaction wherein the party of the second part (Light Bulb)
    shall be removed from the current position as a result of failure to perform
    previously agreed upon duties, i.e., the lighting, elucidation, and 
    otherwise illumination of the area ranging from the front (north) door, 
    through the entryway, terminating at an area just inside the primary living
    area, demarcated by the beginning of the carpet, any spillover illumination
    being at the option of the party of the second part (Light Bulb) and not
    required by the aforementioned agreement between the parties.
      The aforementioned removal transaction shall include, but not be limited
    to, the following steps:
      (i) The party of the first part (Lawyer) shall, with or without elevation
    at his option, by means of a chair, stepstool, ladder or any other means of
    elevation, grasp the party of the second part (Light Bulb) and rotate the
    party of the second part (Light Bulb) in a counter-clockwise direction,this
    point being non-negotiable.
      (ii) Upon reaching a point where the party of the second part (Light Bulb)
    becomes separated from the party of the third part ("Receptacle"), the party
    of the first part (Lawyer) shall have the option of disposing of the party
    of the second part (Light Bulb) in a manner consistent with all applicable
    state, local and federal statutes.
      (iii) Once separation and disposal have been achieved, the party of the
    first part (Lawyer) shall have the option of beginning installation of the
    party of the fourth part ("New Light Bulb").  This installation shall occur
    in a manner consistent with the reverse of the procedures described in step
    (i) of this self-same document, being careful to note that the rotation
    should occur in a clockwise direction, this point also being non-negotiable.
      NOTE: The above described steps may be performed, at the option of the
    party of the first part (Lawyer), by any or all persons authorized by him,
    the objective being to produce the most possible revenue for the party of
    the fifth part, also known as "Partnership."

How many law professors does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Hell, you need 250 just to lobby for the research grant.

How many Lebanese does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Two, one to stage a suicide attack on the bulb and another to claim
responsibility in phone call to the news media.

How many lesbians does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Three.  One to screw it in and two to talk about how much better it
is than with a man.

How many liberals does it take to screw in a light bulb?
1)  One liberal and twenty-eight delegates representing all the social,
    economic, and ethnic communities.
2)  Sorry, they can't remove the old one as it's already part of the
    environment.

How many Libertarians does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Libertarians never change light bulbs, because someone might enter
the room who wants to sit in the dark.

How many loggers does it take to screw in a light bulb?
One.  But he uses a chainsaw.

How many magicians does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Into what?

How many managers does it take to screw in a light bulb?
1)  Three.  One to get the bulb and two to get the phone number
    to dial one of their subordinates to actually change it.
2)  Nearly unanswerable, since the one who tries to change it usually
    drops it, and the others call for a planning session.

How many Martians does it take to screw in a light bulb?
One and a half.

How many Marxists does it take to screw in a light bulb?
None.  The light bulb contains the seeds of its own revolution.

How many massage parlor attendants does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Whatever number turns you on, big boy.

How many medflies does it take to screw in a light bulb?
None.  They do it in the fruit.

How many mice does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Only two, but the hard part is getting them into the bulb.

How many Mid-Westerner's does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Five.  One to change the light bulb, four to read the directions.

How many missionaries does it take to screw in a light bulb?
101.  One to screw it in and the other 100 to convince everyone else to
screw in light bulbs too.

How many modern artists does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Four.  One to throw bulbs against the wall, one to pile hundreds
of them in a heap and spray-paint it orange, one to glue
light bulbs to a cocker spaniel, and one to put a bulb in the
socket and fill the room with light while all the critics
and buyers are watching the fellow smashing the bulbs against
the wall, the fellow with the spray-gun, and the cocker spaniel.

Do you know how many musicians it takes to screw in a light bulb?
No, big daddy, but hum a few bars and I'll fake it.

How many Musicians does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Five.  One to screw in the light bulb and four to stand around and say,
"Man, if I'd had his studio time, I could have done that."
 
How many mystery writers does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Two.  One to screw it almost all the way in and the other to give it a
surprising twist at the end.

How many National Security Council members does it take to change a
light bulb?
1)  We can't say.
2)  Three, in fourteen countries.

How many Nebraskans does it take to screw in a light bulb?
What's a light bulb?

How many necrophiliacs does it take to screw in a light bulb?
1)  None.  Necrophiliacs prefer dead bulbs.
2)  Only one.  "Oh, could you please test the socket with your finger 
    while I go get a new bulb?"

How many net.jokers does it take to tell yet-another LBJ?
1,622.  One to tell the orginal joke, and the rest to give some minor
variation of it!

How many net.junkies does it take to screw in a light bulb?
One.  But he's gotta cross-post it ALL OVER THE GODDAM PLACE.

How many netters does it take to submit a light bulb joke?
1000.  One to submit the joke and 999 to submit "How many programmers does
it take to screw in a light bulb?  None, that's a hardware problem."

How many people from New Jersey does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Three.  One to change the light bulb, one to be a witness, and the
third to shoot the witness.

How many New Yorkers does it take to screw in a light bulb?
1)  None of your damn business!
2)  Five.  One to change the bulb and four to protect him from muggers.
3)  201.  One to put it in and 200 to watch it happen without trying
    to stop it.

How many newsmen does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Only one, but he'll tell everybody.

How many NHL officials does it take to screw in a light bulb?
First you have to find one.

How many northern Californians does it take to screw in a light bulb?
None of your f---ing business and have a nice day.

How many nuclear engineers does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Seven.  One to install the new bulb and six to figure out what to do
with the old one for the next 10,000 years.

How many survivors of a nuclear war does it take to screw in a light bulb?
None, because people who glow in the dark don't need light bulbs.

How many OU football players does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Just one, but he gets 3 hours of credit for it.

How many Oregonians does it take to screw in a light bulb?
1)  Five.  One to change the bulb and four more to chase off the 
    Californians who have come up to relate to the experience.
2)  Nine.  One to change the bulb, and eight to protest the nuclear
    power plant that generates the electricty that powers it.

How many pessimists does it take to screw in a light bulb?
None, the old one is probably screwed in too tight.

How many Platonists does it take to screw in a light bulb?
They don't change bulbs.  They have nice fires in their caves and if they
need light they go out and look at the sun...

How many members of the PLO does it take to screw in a light bulb?
45.  One to drive the car, four to shoot the bodyguards of the
president of Sylvania, three to kidnap the president of Sylvania, five
to think up the ransom demands, ten to paste up the ransom note, eight
to cut little eye-holes in the cloth sacks, one to drive a truck with
2000 kilos of dynamite into the American embassy, one to claim
responsibility for the bombing, and twelve to commandeer a building
with working lights.

How many poets does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Three.  One to curse the darkness, one to light a candle, and one to
change the bulb.

How many Polacks does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Just one, but you need 6000 Russian troops in case he goes on strike!

How many poor slobs does it take to screw in a light bulb?
None.  Poor slobs don't have light bulbs - they're too expensive.

What is the difference between a pregnant woman and a light bulb?
You can unscrew a light bulb.

How many pre-med students does it take to screw in a light bulb?
1)  Five.  One to change the bulb and four to pull the ladder
    out from under him.
2)  None.  Pre-meds don't screw, they study.

How many procrastinators does it take to screw in a light bulb?
One.  But he has to wait until the light is better.

How many professors does it take to screw in a light bulb?
1)  Only one, but they get three technical reports out of it.
2)  None.  That's what grad students are for.

How many programmers does it take to screw in a light bulb?
1)  None.  That's a hardware problem.
2)  None.  They just have marketing portray the dead bulb as a feature.
3)  Two.  One always leaves in the middle of the project.

How many "pro-lifers" does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Six.  Two to screw in the bulb and four to testify that it was lit from
the moment they began screwing.

How many psychiatrists does it take to screw in a light bulb?
1)  None.  The bulb will change itself when it is ready.
2)  Only one, but the bulb has got to really WANT to change.

How many psychoanalysts does it take to screw in a light bulb?
How many do you think it takes?

How many punk rockers does it take to screw in a light bulb?
1)  Seven.  One to get on the chair and six to get on the guest list.
2)  Two.  One to screw in the light bulb and the other to smash the old one on
    his forehead.

How many Radcliffe girls does it take to screw in a light bulb?
It's "Women", and it's not funny!

How many Reagans does it take to screw in a light bulb?
1)  What light bulb?
2)  Nancy.

How many Reaganists does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Ten.  One to deny that the bulb is burned out, one to clarify the 
denial "The bulb is really just dim", one to blame the bulb burning
out on the Carter-Mondale administration, one to blame the bulb 
burning out on the Congress, one to ask for a constitutional amendment
that will prohibit bulbs burning out, one to replace the bulb with a 
kerosene lamp, one to borrow money from the Japanese to pay for the
kerosene, one former Reaganist to lobby his old colleagues for a special
favor for the kerosene importer, one to cash the check for investing in
the kerosene importer, one to send the bill to the next generation.

How many real men does it take to screw in a light bulb?
None.  Real men aren't afraid of the dark.

How many real women does it take to screw in a light bulb?
None.  A real woman would have plenty of real men around to do it.

How many rec.humor posters does it take to screw in a light bulb?
1)  1000.  And they change the same bulb over and over and over again
    and still no one notices it's been changed so they change it again and
    again and then they even discuss it and then someone flames them for
    not doing it in rec.humor.d.
2)  565.
    1 to put in a trick bulb (say, a flash bulb).
    6 to flame the first, pointing out that this bulb is different from
    the old one.
    29 to counter-flame, pointing out that the new bulb is *deliberately*
    different, and is parodying the old one.
    7 to leave the room, citing the extreme density of the 6.
    12 to demand that this commentary be redirected to the other room.
    14 to ask that the bulb be changed again, since they missed seeing it
    the first time.
    496 to climb all over each other, trying to put the old bulb back in.

How many referral agents does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Two.  One to screw you out of a fee, and the other to send you to a
store where they ran out of bulbs weeks ago.

How many Paul Reveres does it take to screw in a light bulb?
One if by hand, but two if by feel.

How many Roman Catholics does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Two.  One to screw it in, and another to repent.

How many Russians does it take to screw in a light bulb?
That's a military secret.

How many Russian leaders does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Nobody knows.  Russian leaders don't last as long as light bulbs.

How many straight San Franciscans does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Both of them.

How many science fiction writers does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Two.  One to screw in the light bulb, and one to say, "In 1876, Jules Verne
had the first intimations that electrostatic power was a viable energy
alternative.  Hitherto, the only sources ..."

How many senators does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Two to sponsor the bill and thirty-three to constitute a quorum.
 
How many sex therapists does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Two.  One to screw it in and one to tell him he's screwing it in
the wrong way.

How many sexists does it take to screw in a light bulb?
None.  They'll have their girls do it for them.

How many Shiites does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Four.  One to hijack a light bulb, one to commandeer a jet to 
Beirut airport, one to hold press conferences, and one to negotiate 
with Israel and the US for the release of fluorescent bulbs held
hostage around the world!!

How many social scientists does it take to screw in a light bulb?
They do not change light bulbs; they search for the root cause
as to why the last one went out.

How many Spinks handlers does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Five.
	1 to actually screw in the light bulb,
	1 to carry him out of the ring,
	1 to tell him who put the lights out,
	2 to count the money.
        And it all only takes 91 seconds!


How many supply-siders does it take to screw in a light bulb?
None.  The darkness will cause the light bulb to change by itself.

How many surrealists does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Two.  One to hold the giraffe, and the other to fill the bathtub
with brightly colored machine tools.

How many teachers does it take to screw in a light bulb?
One if at home, but on school time, four.

How many technical writers does it take to screw in a light-bulb?
Just one, provided there's a programmer around to explain how to do it.

How many television evangelists does it take to screw in a light bulb?
None.  Television evangelists screw in motel rooms.

How many terrorists does it take to screw in a light bulb?
20.  One to do it and 19 to develop a distraction.

How many thought police does it take to screw in a light bulb?
None.  There never *was* any light bulb.

How many tourists does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Six.  One to hold the bulb and five to ask for directions.
 
How many union electricians does it take to screw in a light bulb?
1)  Seventeen.  One to give the bulb to the screw-inner.  One to screw in
    the bulb.  One to hold him on the stepladder.  Four to hold the
    stepladder steady.  One to flick the switch to test the bulb.  One to
    make sure that the other bulbs in the room will need fixing.  One to
    supervise.  Two to take a coffee break, one to eat lunch, and one to
    nap.  One to plot the best way of breaking into the apartment at night.
    One to drink martinis with the WASPs.
2)  Four men, four hours.

How many union shop stewards does it take to screw in a light bulb?
50.  50?  Yeah, 50; it's in the contract.

How many UNIX gurus does it take to screw in a light bulb?
One, but first he has to determine the correct path.

How many Unix hacks does it take to screw in a light bulb?
As many as you want; they're all virtual, anyway.

How many USENET users does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Fifty.  One to do it and 49 to talk about it on net.bulbs.d.

How many USENETers does it take to screw in a ligth bulb?
Six.  One to point out the spelling error        ^^  you illiterate idiot!
      One to flame:  GET THIS GARBAGE OFF THE NET!!!
      One to flame the flamer.
      One to ask to be removed from the news group.
      One to ask for a copy of the last message :-)
      And one to ask how to unROT the joke.

How many U.S marines does it take to screw in a light bulb ?
50.  One to screw in the light bulb and the remaining 49 to guard him .

How many utilitarians does it take to screw in a light bulb?
As many as are happy screwing in light bulbs.

How many valley girls does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Oooh, like, manual labor?  Gag me with a spoon!  Fer sure.

How many Vulcans does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Approximately 1.00000000000000000000000.

How many waiters does it take to screw in a light bulb?
None.  Even a burned-out bulb can't catch a waiter's attention.

How many WASPs does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Two.  One to call the electrician and one to mix the martinis.

How many people does it take to throw away a one WATT bulb??
Five.   A Black, a Jew, two women, and a cripple.

How many White House aides does it take to change one of Reagan's
light bulbs?
None.  They like to keep him in the dark.

How many Zen masters does it take to screw in a light bulb?
1)  Two.  One to change the bulb and one not to change it.
2)  None. Zen masters are illuminated by their own inner light.

How many Romanians does it take to screw in a light bulb?
How many packs of cigarettes are you willing to give them?

How many circus performers does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Four.  One to change the bulb and three to go, "Ta da!"

How many Vanna Whites does it take to screw in a light bulb?
None.  A dead bulb won't light up.

How many chiropractors does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Only one, but it takes nine visits.

How many Teamsters does it take to screw in a light bulb?
TWELVE!!  YA GOT A PROBLEM WITH THAT??

How many running-dog lackeys of the bourgeoisie does it take to 
screw in a light bulb?
Two.  One to exploit the proletariat, and one to control the means of
production!

How many graduate students does it take to screw in a light bulb?
I don't know, but make my stipend tax-free, give my advisor a $100,000
grant of the taxpayer's money, and I'm sure he can tell me how to do the
shit work for him so he can take the credit for answering this incredibly
vital question.

How many light bulb jokes does it take to screw in a light bulb joke?
The probability that a given light bulb joke will be submitted to
the net in any given week is 0.4, and the probability that it will
have changed detectably since the last transmission is 0.2.  Assuming
independence (which is reasonable, since no submitter of a light bulb
joke ever seems to know it has been submitted before within the last 2
or 3 weeks), the probability that it will change in a given week is
thus 0.08.  So it takes about 12.5 light bulb jokes to change a
light bulb joke.

How many real men does it take to cross a river?
5000.  4999 to build a suspension bridge and 1 to drive a tractor
trailer across.

How many men does it take to clean a toilet?
None, it's women's work!

How many Kentuckians does it take to eat a possum?
Two.  One has to watch for cars.

How many Neanderthals does it take to light a fire?
None.  They don't have it.

+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
|                                                                              |
|    What you are about to see is true; only the typos have been changed       |
|    to protect the innocent.  This is the original, uncut and uncensored      |
|    material sent to me from all corners of the globe (and beyond).           |
|                                                                              |
|    If you want to receive periodic updates to the file, or you wish to       |
|    contribute material, send e-mail to peter@eevlsi.ee.columbia.edu.         |
|                                                                              |
|    Enjoy!!                                                                   |
|                                                                              |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+


  An American tourist went into a restaurant in a Spanish provincial
city for dinner, and asked to be served the specialty of the house.
When the dish arrived, he asked what kind of meat it contained.

  "Sir, these are the COJONES", the waiter replied.
  "The what, you say?", exclaimed the tourist.
  "They are testicles of the bull killed in the ring today," explained
the waiter.

  The tourist gulped but tasted the plate anyway, and found it delicious.
Returning the following evening, he asked for the same dish.  After he
finished the meal, the tourist commented to the waiter:
  "Today's COJONES are much smaller than the ones I had yesterday."
  "True, sir," said the waiter, "... you see the bull, he does not
always lose!"

----- 

	There once was a race of smurf-like creatures called "Trids".
The Trids were happy, peaceful, folks, who lived in a village at the
base of a mountain.  Part of their culture was an annual ceremony, in
which the whole population would go up to the top of the mountain for
a grand celebration.  On the way to the mountaintop there was a river
that they had to cross, and a single bridge was the only way across.

	One year, as the annual trek was underway, the Trids came to
the bridge only to discover a huge troll sitting in the middle of the
bridge, blocking the path.  One of the Trids was brave enough to step
onto the bridge and walk up to the troll, attempting to pass by.  But
as he got near, the troll picked up the Trid, and drop-kicked him,
sending him rolling down the mountainside back toward the Trid
village.  Another Trid attempted to cross the bridge, but was met
with the same reaction from the Troll, and went rolling down the hill
after the Troll kicked him.

	As a third Trid walked onto the bridge, a Rabbi happened to be
walking along the riverside, just in time to see the Trid get kicked
into the air and roll down the mountain.  Outraged, the Rabbi stomped
up onto the bridge and began walking toward the troll.  As he got
near, the troll stood to one side, allowing the Rabbi room to pass.
The Rabbi was very surprised at this, and asked the Troll, "Why are
you kicking the Trids when they attempt to use this bridge, but you
let me pass?".  And the troll replied:

	"Silly Rabbi, kicks are for Trids!"




                               --------
                 Dave Thorpe   |\ _____   GEC Hirst Research Centre
      davet@uk.co.gec-rl-hrc   | ) | |    East Lane, Wembley, England
   A39 Data Systems Division   |/.\|.|.   +44 (01) 908 9303
                               --------

