Two guys live next door to each other.  One has a Porsche and the
other has a Mini Cooper.  Every day the leave for work at the same
time.  One day the guy in the Mini knocks on the window of the
Porsche.
"Excuse me, do you have good reception on your TV around here?"
The guy in the Porsche is slightly annoyed and says
"I don't have a TV in my car!"
"No TV in your Porsche?" the Mini driver laughs.  "You have a Porsche
and no television in it?"  He drives off quickly.

The following morning the same thing happens.
The Mini driver asks "Excuse me neighbour, do you have any ice in your
bar?"
"I don't have a bar" replies the other.
"You mean you have a Porsche and you don't have a bar!"
The guy in the Mini drives off.

The following morning the guy in the Mini says "Excuse me neighbour,
do you by any chance have any nuts I could have with my drink?"
"Sorry pal but I don't have any nuts in my car."
"No nuts in a Porsche!  How sad!"

Next day the guy in the mini asks again, "Sorry pal, have you
got any good videotapes in there?  There's nothing good on TV."
"Unfortunately I don't have a video or any tapes in here" he replies.
The guy in the Mini is really surprised, "You're really useless and
you don't know how to spend your money."
He drives off.

The guy in the Porsche is really pissed off and decides he has to
silence the Mini driver.  He fits a TV, VCR and satelitte dish in the
Porsche, he buys every kind of alcoholic drink available, puts in a
fridge full of ice, buys 1000 videotapes - all the new realeses and he
also gets every kind of nut available.

The following morning the guy in the Porsche goes up to the Mini and
bangs on the window.
"Listen neighbour, I've got 200 channels with perfect reception on my
TV, I have every video you have ever dreamed of, I can offer you any
drink you want with as much ice as possible and any kind of nut you
want so now you can shut the fuck up and leave me alone."
"Man, are you crazy?  Stop hassling me!  For god's sake, I was taking
a shower!"
