TO: geoff denis bruce krste jdr jim karen karia
SUBJECT: Missive de Geoff






		Visits for ESPRIT Projects 415 (Subproject B)
                                           954 Ikaros
                                           967 Madpavati

                                           
			   5th February	1988

                Brief Descripion of Project members

                           for Visitors




Dr. Geoffrey Burn :

     Project leader of E415 at Hirst.  Along with Rodney Rude, he seems
     to be (at least in body) architecturally Australian.  You  experts
     have had problems with this one before.  This guy's  an  excellent 
     talker and responds to blatant reviewer provocation with  a stead-
     fast "G'day matey, gimmie more - I can take it" strategy.

Denis B. Ran dem Phowe :

     Project Leader of Madpavati.  Will attend any  meeting  providing
     food and/or drink are on offer.  Will usually sleep through the
     afternoon session.  This guy's pretty laid back (into minimalist
     minimalism).  If you can wake him up, when really provoked he will
     turn to sarcasm, falling asleep again, or asking his group leader
     to deal with it.

Mid. Br*ce L.R. C*m*r*n :

     From the Univ. North Wembley.  He	was helpful once when you wrote
     him a letter asking him to	clarify	the comments in one of his woolly
     deliverables.  Basically he said he should concentrate on	abstract
     middle management activites, refraining from "doing" anything.
     Watch this one, he can cunningly sound VERY convincing.

Prof. James-Richard Chapman :

     Cantabrigian.  A slug of most stubborn opinions.  You have had many 
     problems with him in the past (e.g. IKAROS project when he insisted
     on wearing a silly hat throughout his software demonstration).  He  
     made some bad remarks about his French project partners at the last
     project review and was duly raped over the slime glands.  Likes aca-
     demic work.

Mr Krste Asanovic :

     Works with	Sun Consoles, loves playing with  things  like  SUNs  in
     the pixel pickers playpen.  He is fairly new to the project but has
     already managed to make the CAM look less of a joke than it did when
     he arrived.  He never attends reviews because he's always off playing
     with his bass.  He has an excellent knowledge of the design of the
     CAM and is capable of answering any of your pernickety technical
     questions with aplomb "like water off a Yugoslave's back" - D. Ram
     dem Phowe.


		       Lunchtime Drinking Arrangements

  
                                              Slow
                   Beaujolais   Anything   comfortable
                    villages    alcoholic   screw-up
                       |           |           | 
                      JRC         DBPh        BLRC

                      GLB         DBPh        KA
                       |           |           |   
                    Fosters       More      Sljivovac
                                 alcohol


			    February 3,	1988


