From: swauchope@acorn.co.uk (Sam Wauchope)
Newsgroups: comp.sys.acorn
Subject: RiscPC launch
Date: 21 Apr 1994 17:50:25 +0100
Organization: Acorn Computers Ltd, Cambridge, England

I am a regular reader of Comp. Sys. Acorn, although this is my
first effort as a contributor.  I would like to thank you all
for the important feedback we receive via this channel.  We
may not always give you exactly what you want (I doubt we ever
could) but your views are considered, I assure you.

I am pleased our launch activity, especially Saturday's events,
seems to have been popular.  I thought it might be useful to
respond on a few of the specific points raised recently.

1.      The "tailors" who designed and made my tie are Ralph
        and Diego Zenklusen of Evolution Trading, Acorn's
        Swiss distributor.  Very limited edition Christmas
        gifts, I'm afraid.

2.      Compliments re the music have been passed on to the
        lady who put it together.  Other "compliments",
        especially re lycra-clad dancing girls, I have also
        passed on but in suitably paraphrased form.  With
        regard to telephone numbers, sorry I can't help (and
        no, I don't have them either).

3.      And oh yes, bundled monitors.  We hear you loud and
        clear.  Please do appreciate our desire to ensure
        that our customers, especially those without a
        technical background, (eg. many of those in schools)
        receive high-quality systems with monitors that take
        full advantage of the facilities of the machine, 
        within price constraints.  

        Supply of randomly sourced, "bargain of the month" 
        monitors would not I think be helpful in most cases.
        Nevertheless, I do recognise that many of you have
        particular requirements or preferences, and that
        many of you have already invested in a good quality
        monitor.  Accordingly we have made arrangements with
        our consumer dealers that individual enthusiasts
        with particular requirements can purchase machines
        without monitors.  In return, we ask only for a
        registration so that we can ensure our other customers
        are being properly supported.

I hope this helps, and thanks again for your support.

Sam Wauchope
(Managing Director--Acorn Computers)
