From: ccox@acorn.co.uk (Chris Cox)
Newsgroups: comp.sys.acorn.hardware,comp.sys.acorn
Subject: Re: 700 Upgrade cards
Date: 21 Apr 1995 16:04:37 +0100
Organization: Acorn Computers Ltd, Cambridge, England
NNTP-Posting-Host: acorn.acorn.co.uk

There has been a lot of discussion about the clock speeds and performance of
the 700 cards. I hope that the following will help clarify some of the
issues involved.

The ARM700 and ARM710 processors represent a significant improvement over
the current ARM610 processors. They have a higher maximum clock speed and a
number of architectural improvements such as double the size of internal
cache, this means that more of any process can be executed internally
without accessing the (relatively) slow external memory. Other improvements
are an improved write buffer and an enlarged Translation Lookaside Buffer in
the MMU. All of these improvements increase the performance of the system
and deliver more real performance than a simple comparison of clock speeds
would indicate. 

For floating point work the FPA11 processor has a peak throughput of up to 5
MFLOPS (Millions  of FLoating point Operations Per Second) and
achieves an average throughput in excess of 3 MFLOPS for a range of
calculations. Applications which make use of the RISC OS Floating Point
Emulator will automatically use the FPA chip, increasing floating point
performance by as much as a factor of 50. This will make a huge difference
in the performance of floating point intensive tasks such as ray tracing. 

The FPA11 is interfaced to the ARM700 over a simple, high-performance
co-processor bus. The ARM instruction pipeline is mirrored in FPA11 so that
floating point instructions can be executed directly with minimum
communication overhead. Pipelining, concurrent execution units and
speculative execution are all used to improve performance without
significantly impacting power consumption. The ARM700 processor, which has
the external coprocessor bus interface, is currently fabricated on a process
that limits the maximum clock speed to 33MHz. 

The ARM710 has been optimised for integer performance, and of the samples
that we have evaluated the fastest ran at 55MHz However there is a big
difference between a prototype based on a sample and a production board.
When we specify the production boards we have to make sure that they will
work under all conditions, and for all devices. This means that we have to
derate the clock speed to allow for a number of different factors:

Fastest ever ARM710 sample seen running in ideal conditions   55MHz   

Allow for power drop to 4.75V eg when HDD spins up            0.97    

Allow for a max chip temp of 70 deg C                         0.9   
(30deg ambient +15deg inside case +25deg inside chip)    

Process spread from the fastest part                          0.825   

Multiplying these together gives the specification of         40MHz

These are the figures that we use, based on our experience of a number of
different fabricators. As you can see from the above figures it is
perfectly possible that with the right crystal, a particular board in a
particular system might run at 50MHz to 55MHz, but this cannot be
guaranteed. 



Chris Cox
Enthusiasts Sales and Marketing Manager

(Please send Clan related mail to clan@acorn.co.uk thanks)
