                                Mao
                                ===

Five cards are dealt to each player, the rest are placed face-down in
the centre to form the pool and the top one turned over to form the
discard pile.  The player to the left of the dealer starts and play
passes to the left initially.  Each player must play a card of the
same rank or suit as the card on top of the discard pile except under
circumstances described below.  If he can't he must take the top card
from the pool.  Any player may take the top card from the pool at any
time and may always do so instead of discarding a card.  When the pool
is empty, the discard pile (except its top card) is turned over to
become the new pool.

Certain ranks and suits have actions associated with them:

7	When playing a 7 you must say "Have a nice day" and the next
	player must either take a card and say "Penalty card" or, if he
	has another 7, he may play it and say "Have a very nice day", in
	which case the next player in turn must take two cards, saying
	"Penalty card" for each one, and so on.

8	Reverse direction of play.

Jack	After a jack is played, any player must name a suit.  The
	next card must be this suit or another jack.

Queen	The next player misses a turn.

Spade	The person playing a spade must name the card, "three of
	spades" etc..

When a player plays his penultimate card he must say "Last card" and
when playing his last card he must say "Mao", at which point he is out
of the game.  He may take five cards from the pool and rejoin the game
at any time.  He may subsequently say "New rule" to declare that a
rule of his devising is now in force but he need not say what that
rule is.

Players may not speak during play except as indicated below.  New
players are NOT told the rules except that the object is to get rid of
all their cards.  Any player may make any of the following calls when
they think another player has broken a rule.  The player making the
call takes a card from the pool and passes it to the other player.

"Talking"

	A player has spoken, other than as required by the rules or to
	make a call or during a Point of Order.

"Playing out of turn"

	A player has played or taken a card or cards at the wrong
	time.

"Failure to play within five seconds"

	A player has not started his turn within five seconds from the
	end of the previous player's turn.

"Bad card"

	A player has played a card which is not allowed (ie. the wrong
	suit or rank).

"Bad call"

	A player has used the wrong wording in a call.

"Bad adjudication"

	A player has made a correctly worded but inappropriate call.

"Failure to take penalty card"

	A player should have taken a card but failed to do so before
	the start of the next turn.

"Point of order"

	This is not a penalty call and no card is passed.  Any player
	may make this call at any time, except during a Point of
	Order.  During a Point of Order all players may speak freely
	but they may not touch any cards (except to make the calls
	allowed during a Point of Order) and they may not say "point
	of order" or "Mao" except to say "End of point of order",
	whereupon normal play resumes.

"Touching cards during Point of Order"

	A player has touched his or another player's cards during a
	point of order.

Saying "point of order" during a point of order

	A player has said "point of order" during a Point of Order
	other than to say "end of point of order".  Abbreviations such
	as "P of O" are allowed.

"Taking our Glorious Leader's name in vain"

	A player has said "Mao" other than when playing his last card.

"Failure to say 'Last card'", etc.

	A player has failed to say "Penalty card", "Have a nice day",
	"Three of spades", "Last card", "Mao", etc..

Failure to name our Glorious Leader.

	A player has played his last card but has not said "Mao".
