"The decision which way	round the digits run is, of  course,  mathemati-
cally  trivial.	 Indeed,  one early British computer had numbers running
from right to left (because the	spot on	an oscilloscope	tube  runs  from
left  to  right,  but  in  serial logic	the least significant digits are
dealt with first). Turing used to mystify audiences at	public	lectures
when,  quite  by accident, he would slip into this mode	even for decimal
arithmetic, and	write things like 73+42=16.  The  next	version	 of  the
machine	 was  made more	conventional simply by crossing	the x-deflection
wires: this, however, worried the engineers, whose  waveforms  were  all
backwards.  That problem was in	turn solved by providing a little window
so that	the engineers (who tended to  be  behind  the  computer	 anyway)
could view the oscilloscope screen from	the back."

[C. Strachey - private communication]
From denis Mon Jan  5 14:39 GMT 1987
TO: jdr

It was Alan [Turing]'s job to make the Manchester machine easy to use,
but his ideas of convenience were not always shared by others. Alan held
that human convenience should be catered for by programming techniques,
not by electronics. In his 1947 talk he had refered to such matters of
convenience as `fussy little details', and had stressed how they could
be taken care of by `pure paperwork'. Now at Manchester, he had the
opportunity, in principle, to put this into practice - for the machine
hardware had not been designed to pander to the programmer. However, by
1949 he had lost interest in doing this kind of work. The `fussy little
details' of binary to decimal conversion, for instance, he now found not
worth bothering about. He himself found it simple to work in the base-32
arithmetic in which the machine could be regarded as working, and
expected other people to do the same.

To use base-32 arithmetic it was necessary to find 32 symbols for the 32
different `digits'. Here he took over the system already used by the
engineers, in which they labelled the five-bit combinations according to
the Baudot teleprinter code. To work this system meant memorising the
Baudot code and the multiplication table as expressed in it - something
he, but few others, found easy.

The ostensible reason for sticking to this hideously primitive form of
coding which entailed so much work for the user, was that the cathode
ray tube storage made it possible - indeed necessary - to check the
contents of the store by `peeping' as Alan called it, at a monitor tube.
He insisted that what one saw as spots on the tube had to correspond
digit by digit to the program that had been written out. To maintain
this principle of correspondence it was actually necessary to write out
the base-32 numbers backwards, with the least significant digit first.
This was for techinical electronic engineering reasons, the same as
those which obliged cathode ray tubes to always scan from left to right.
Another awkwardness arose on account of the five-bit combinations which
did not correspond to a letter of the alphabet on the Baudot code. Geoff
Tootill had already introduced extra symbols for these, the zero of the
base-32 notation being represented by a stroke `/'. The result was that
pages of programs were covered with strokes - an effect which at
Cambridge was said to reflect the Manchester rain lashing at the
windows.

[ Andrew Hodges "Alan Turing - The Enigma of Intelligence" page 398 ]

I just finished reading the above (excellent) biography of AMT which
also mentions C. Strachey.

To who was the private communication addressed ?

