		    INITIAL SET OF RULES OF NOMIC
			

			I.  *Immutable Rules*


101	All players must always abide by all the rules then in effect,
	in the form in which they are then in effect.  The rules in
	the Initial Set are in effect whenever a game begins.  The
	Initial Set consists of Rules 101-116 (immutable) and 201-213
	(mutable).

102	Initially, rules in the 100's are immutable and rules in the
	200's are mutable.  Rules subsequently enacted or transmuted
	(i.e.  changed from immutable to mutable or vice versa) may be
	immutable or mutable regardless of their numbers, and rules in
	the Initial Set may be transmuted regardless of their numbers.

103	A rule change is any of the following: (1) the enactment,
	repeal, or amendment of a mutable rule; (2) the enactment,
	repeal, or amendment of an amendment, or (3) the transmutation
	of an immutable rule into a mutable rule, or vice versa.
	(Note: This definition implies that, at least initially, all
	new rules are mutable.	Immutable rules, as long as they are
	immutable, may not be amended or repealed; mutable rules, as
	long as they are mutable, may be amended or repealed.  No rule
	is absolutely immune to change.)

104	All rule changes proposed in the proper way shall be voted on.
	They will be adopted if and only if they receive the required
	number of votes.

105	Every player is an eligible voter.  Every eligible voter must
	participate in every vote on rule changes.

106	Any proposed rule change must be written down before it is
	voted on.  If adopted, it must guide play in the form in which
	it was voted on.
	
107	No rule change may take effect earlier than the moment of the
	completion of the vote that adopted it, even if its wording
	explicitly states otherwise.  No rule change may have
	retroactive application.

108	Each proposed rule change shall be given a rank-order number
	(ordinal number) for reference.	 The numbers shall begin with
	301, and each rule change proposed in the proper way shall
	receive the next successive integer, whether or not the
	proposal is adopted.

	If a rule is repealed and then re-enacted, it receives the
	ordinal number of the proposal to re-enact it.	If a rule is
	amended or transmuted, it receives the ordinal number of the
	proposal to amend or transmute it.  If an amendment is amended
	or repealed, the entire rule of which it is a part receives
	the ordinal number of the proposal to amend or repeal the
	amendment.

109	Rule changes that transmute immutable rules into mutable rules
	may be adopted if and only if the vote is unanimous among the
	eligible voters.

110	Mutable rules that are inconsistent in any way with some
	immutable rule (except by proposing to transmute it) are
	wholly void and without effect.	 They do not implicitly
	transmute immutable rules into mutable rules and at the same
	time amend them.  Rule changes that transmute immutable rules
	into mutable rules will be effective if and only if they
	explicitly state their transmuting effect.

111	If a rule change as proposed is unclear, ambiguous,
	paradoxical, or clearly destructive of play, or if it arguably
	consists of two or more rule changes compounded or is an
	amendment that makes no difference, or if it is otherwise of
	questionable value, then the other players may suggest
	amendments or argue against the proposal before the vote.  A
	reasonable amount of time must be allowed for this debate.
	The proponent decides the final form in which the proposal is
	to be voted on and decides the time to end debate and vote.
	The only cure for a bad proposal is prevention: a negative
	vote.

112	The state of affairs that constitutes winning may not be
	changed from achieving n points to any other state of affairs.
	However, the magnitude of n and the means of earning points
	may be changed, and rules that establish a winner when play
	cannot continue may be enacted and (while they are mutable) be
	amended or repealed.

113	A player always has the option to forfeit the game rather than
	continue to play or incur a game penalty.  No penalty worse
	than losing, in the judgement of the player to incur it, may
	be imposed.

114	There must always be at least one mutable rule.	 The adoption
	of rule changes must never become completely impermissible.

115	Rule changes that affect rules needed to allow or apply rule
	changes are as permissible as other rule changes.  Even rule
	changes that amend or repeal their own authority are
	permissible.  No rule change or type of move is impermissible
	solely on account of the self-reference or self-application of
	a rule.

116	Whatever is not explicitly prohibited or regulated by a rule
	is permitted and unregulated, with the sole exception of
	changing the rules, which is permitted only when a rule or set
	of rules explicitly or implicitly permits it.



			 II.  *Mutable Rules*


201	Players shall alternate in clockwise order, taking one whole
	turn apiece.  Turns may not be skipped or passed, and parts of
	turns may not be omitted.  All players begin with zero points.

203	A rule change is adopted if and only if the vote is unanimous
	among the eligible voters.

205	An adopted rule change takes full effect at the moment of the
	completion of the vote that adopted it.

206	When a proposed rule change is defeated, the player who
	proposed it loses 10 points.

207	Each player always has exactly one vote.

208	The winner is the first player to achieve 100 (positive)
	points.

209	At no time may there be more than 25 mutable rules.

210	Players may not conspire or consult on the making of future
	rule changes unless they are teammates.

211	If two or more mutable rules conflict with one another, or if
	two or more immutable rules conflict with one another, then
	the rule with the lowest ordinal number takes precedence.

	If at least one of the rules in conflict explicitly says of
	itself that it defers to another rule (or type of rule) or
	takes precedence over another rule (or type of rule), then
	such provisions shall supersede the numerical method for
	determining precedence.

	If two or more rules claim to take precedence over one another
	or to defer to one another, then the numerical method must
	again govern.

212	If players disagree about the legality of a move or the
	interpretation or application of a rule, then the player
	preceding the one moving is to be the Judge and to decide the
	question.  Disagreement, for the purposes of this rule, may be
	created by the insistence of any player.  Such a process is
	called *invoking judgement*.

	When judgement has been invoked, the next player may not begin
	his or her turn own turn without the consent of a majority of
	the other players.

	The Judge's judgement may be overruled only by a unanimous
	vote of the other players, taken before the next turn is
	begun.  If a Judge's judgement is overruled, the player
	preceding the Judge in the playing order becomes the new Judge
	for the question, except that no player is to be Judge during
	his own turn or during the turn of a teammate.

	Unless a Judge is overruled, one Judge settles all questions
	arising from the game until the next turn is begun, including
	questions as to his or her own legitimacy and jurisdiction as
	Judge.

	New Judges are not bound by the decisions of old Judges.  New
	Judges may, however, settle only those questions on which the
	players currently disagree and that affect the completion of
	the turn in which judgement was invoked.  All decisions by
	Judges shall be in accordance with all the rules then in
	effect; but when the rules are silent, inconsistent, or
	unclear on the point at issue, then the Judge's only guides
	shall be common morality, common logic, and the spirit of the
	game.

213	If the rules are changed so that further play is impossible,
	or if the legality of a move is impossible to determine with
	finality, or if by the Judge's best reasoning, not overruled,
	a move appears equally legal and illegal, then the first
	player who is unable to complete a turn is the winner.

	This rule takes precedence over every other rule determining
	the winner.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

			III.  *Added Rules*

301	Proposed rule changes, including modifications to rule changes
	currently under discussion, must be sent via e-mail to all
	players.

303	All votes on the current proposal in hand and on any revisions
	on it shall be sent to the proposer and no other player, this
	person being deemed to vote in favour of the final form of the
	proposal [as defined in rule 111].  When the vote is complete,
	the proposer shall broadcast all the votes cast.

305	One turn consists of two parts, in this order: (1) one rule
	change is proposed and voted on, and (2) the proposer gains
	one point for each vote in favour and loses one point for each
	vote against.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

Number of mutable rules (see rule 114, 209): 14.

