	COMPILED by D Howe from

Path: hrc63!ukc!mcvax!enea!erix!erialfa!roger
From: roger@erialfa.UUCP (Roger Svensson)
Newsgroups: eunet.jokes
Subject: Light Bulb Jokes ...
Message-ID: <159@erialfa.UUCP>
Date: 28 Sep 87 13:22:54 GMT
Reply-To: roger@erialfa.UUCP (Roger Svensson)
Distribution: eunet
Organization: Ericsson Information Systems AB, Kista, Stockholm, SWEDEN

	AND

Path: hrc63!root44!stc!stl!ukc!its63b!hwcs!adrian
From: adrian@cs.hw.ac.uk (Adrian Hurt)
Newsgroups: eunet.jokes
Subject: More light bulbs
Keywords: Imported
Message-ID: <1673@brahma.cs.hw.ac.uk>
Date: 1 Feb 88 10:59:57 GMT
Distribution: eunet
Organization: Computer Science, Heriot-Watt U., Scotland

	AND

Plexus fortunes AND other places


             From "The Cannonical Collection of Light Bulb Jokes"
             ====================================================

Q: How many Californians does it to change a lightbulb ?
A: Six, One to turn the bulb, one for support and four to relate to
   experience.

Q: How many Oregonians does it take to change a lightbulb ?
A: Five, One to change the bulb and four moore to chase off the
   Californians who have come up to relate to the experience.

Q: How many Psychiatrists does it take to change a lightbulb ?
A: Only one, but the lightbulb has got to really *want* to change.

Q: How many programmers does it take to change a lightbulb ?
A: None, Thats hardware problem!

Q: How many Bell Labs Vice Presidents does it take to change a lightbulb ? 
A: Thats proprietary information. Answer available from Western Electric
   Corp. on payment of licence fee (binary ONLY).

Q: How many graduate students does it take to change a lightbulb ?
A: Only one, but it may take upwards of five years for him to get it
   done.

Q:  How many "Real Men" does it take to change a light bulb ?
A1: None, "Real Men" aren't afraid of the dark.
A2: None of your damn business.

Q: How many "Real Women" does it take to change a light bulb ?
A: None, a "Real Woman" have plenty of real men around to do it.

Q: How many Polacks does it take to change a light bulb ?
A: Just one, but you need 6000 Russian troops in case he goes one strike.

Q: How many Marxists does it take to change a light bulb ?
A: None, The lightbulb contains the seeds of its own revolution.

Q: How many (generals/Politicians) does it take to change a light bulb ?
A: 1000001, One to change the bulb and 1000000 to rebuild civilization
   to the point were they needs light bulbs again.

Q:  How many New Yorkers does it take to change a light bulb ?
A1: None of your damn business.
A2: 50. 50 ? Yeah 50; its in the contract!

Q: How many medic. students does it take to change a light bulb ?
A: Five, One to change the bulb, and four to pull the ladder out from
   under him.

Q: How many Jugglers does it take to change a light bulb ?
A: One, but it takes at least three light bulbs!

Q: How many feminists does it take to change a light bulb ?
A: Thats not funny!!!!

Q: How many supply-side economists does it take to change a light bulb ?
A: None, if the Government just leave it alone, it would screw itself.

Q: How many Database-people does it take to change a light bulb ?
A: Three:
	one to write the light bulb removal program,
	one to write the light bulb insertion program and
	one to act as a light bulb administrator to make sure nobody
	else tries to change the light bulb as the same time.

Q: How many *straight* San Fransiscans does it take to change a light bulb ? 
A: Both of them

Q: How many folksingers does it take to change a light bulb ?
A: Two, One to change the bulb and one to write a song about how good
   the old light bulb was.

Q: How many surrealists does it take to change a light bulb ?
A: Two, One to hold the pink giraffe, and the other to fill the bathtub
   with brightly coloured machine tools.

Q: How many psychologists does it take to change a light bulb ?
A: None, the light bulb will change itself when its ready!

Q: How many IBM types does it take to change a light bulb ?
A: 100, Ten to do it, and 90 to write document number 8832902-3320
   Multitasking Incandescent Source System Facility, of which 10% of the
   pages state only "This page intentionally left blank" and 20% of the
   definitions are on the form "A ... consists of sequences of non-blank
   characters separated by blanks".

Q: How many Macintosh users does it take to change a light bulb ?
A: None. You have to replace the whole motherboard.

Q: How many Unix hacks does it take to change a light bulb ?
A: As many as you want; they're all virtual anyway.

Q: How many people does it take to throw away a one Watt bulb ?
A: Five: A Black, a Jew, two women, and a cripple...

Q: How many cops does it take to screw in a light bulb ?
A: None. It turned itself in.

Q: How many football players does it take to change a light bulb ?
A: The entire team! And they all get a semester's credit for it!

Q: How many mystery writers does it take to screw in a light bulb ?
A: Two: One to screw it almost all the way in and the other to give
   it a surprising twist at the end.

Q: How many existentialists does it take to screw in a light bulb ?
A: Two: One to screw it in and one to observe how the light
   bulb itself symbolises a single incandescent beacon of
   subjective reality in a netherworld of endless absurdity
   reaching out toward a cosmos of nothingness.

Q: How many junkies does it take to change a light bulb ?
A: Who says it's dark ?

Q: How many members of the Impossible Missions Force does it take
   to change a light bulb ?
A: Five: While Cinnamon creates a diversion by wearing a skimpy
   dress, I use a tiny narcotic dart to knock out the fascist
   dictator and remove his body. Rollin, wearing a plastic mask,
   masquerades as the dictator long enough for Barney to sneak
   up to the next floor, drill a hole down into the light fixture,
   remove the burned-out bulb, and replace it with a new super-
   high wattage model of his own design. Meanwhile, Willie has
   driven up to the door in a laundry truck. Just before Rollin's
   real identity is revealed, we escape to the laundry truck,
   drive to the airfield, and return to the United States.

Q: How many technical writers does it take to screw in a light bulb ?
A: Just one, provided there's a programmer around to explain how
   to do it.

Q: How many Harvard students does it take to screw in a light bulb ?
A: Just one. He holds the light bulb and the universe revolves around
   him.

Q: How many punk rockers does it take to screw in a light bulb ?
A: Twenty:  one to hold the bulb, two to turn the ladder, and seventeen
   in on the guest list.

Q: How many Zen masters does it take to change a light bulb ?
A1: Two. One to change it, and one not to change it.
A2: None.  The Universe spines the bulb, and the Zen master stays out
   of the way.

Q: How many Californians does it take to screw in a light bulb?
A: NONE!  Californians screw in hot tubs, not light bulbs!

Q: How many Oregonians does it take to screw in a light bulb?
A: Three.  One to screw in the lightbulb and two to fend off all those
   Californians trying to share the experience.

Q: How many hardware engineers does it take to change a lightbulb?
A: None: "We'll fix it in software."

Q: How many software engineers does it take to change a lightbulb?
A: None: "We'll document it in the manual."

Q: How many tech writers does it take to change a lightbulb?
A: None: "The user can work it out."

Q: How many mice does it take to screw in a lightbulb?
A: Two, but how the hell do they get in?

Q: How many DEC employees does it take to change a lightbulb?
A:  2 People - Preliminary discussion on concept of change.
    1 Person - Devise and write formal bulb architecture.
    2 People - Feasability study and timetable of events.
    2 People - Produce four utilities to reduce screw-in time
           (in addition to the electric utility).
    1 Person - Maintain ISO and DEC standards
           (sockets, voltage, AC/DC).
    4 People - Commonality task force on bulb change.
   15 People - Change bulb.
    5 People - Perform bulb functional test.
    2 People - Perform bulb load test.
    3 People - Perform bulb regression test.
    1 Person - Perform bulb performance analysis.
    1 Person - Perform bulb bottleneck analysis.
    1 Person - Follow-up study (bulb merge feasibility).
    1 Person - Interface with utilities commission.
    1 Person - Interface with users. (Did they want incandescent
           when we only supply non-tunable fluorescent point
           product?) BAX (Bulbs Are eXpensive)!
    5 People - Perform BOSE (Build Other Socket Enhancements).
           compatibility architecture/study.
    3 People - Perform VIA (Voltage Increases Amps) phase 2
           compatibility architecture/study.
    2 People - Ensure form (round, square, clear/frosted)
           follows function (wattage, 120/240 volts,
           visible/ultra-violet, flashing, flood/spot).
    3 People - Implement temporary alternative bulb socket for already
           existing, successful, and profitable socket (bulb-in-one).
    5 People - Determine how to market/package/distribute temporary
           alternative bulb socket.
   10 People - Determine how to perform bulb change product split
           (Control:  switches, dimmers; versus implementation:
           screw-in torque, recovery strategies).
    1 Person - Interface with utilities commission QA group.
    1 Person - Submit to BDC (Bulb Distribution Center).
    1 Person - Set up BPR (Bulb Problem Reports) system.
   10 People - Answer customer BPRs.
   11 People - Football team to challenge bulb changers.

Q: How many LADA's do you need to change a lightbulb?
A: 13. 12 in part exchange and 1 to stand on.
